----------------------------------------------------------------------
Report of the Referee -- DT12301/Marsat
----------------------------------------------------------------------

The authors have presented a specific approach to include modulations
in gravitational waveforms either due to intrinsic physics (e.g.
precession) or due to the motion of a spacecraft via the use of
Fourier transfer functions. The paper details the methodology of their
approach and presents comparisons to other methods. Applications to
the response of LISA-like detectors as well as precessing binaries for
Advanced LIGO are presented, and the caveats/breakdown of the approach
in various regimes is demonstrated.

The approach builds on several previously developed methods and in
particular extends the work of Klein et al. to higher order for
inspiral waveforms.

Additionally, the authors present a simple model for post-merger
precession.

-Overall, I think the paper is far too long and repetitive. I strongly
encourage the authors to shorten it.
  consider
  
-In particular, detailed reviews of well-known mathematical methods (e.g. SPA) appear unnecessary.
  consider

-The discussion of precession and frame decomposition simply rewrites
methodology sections of the original papers where this concept was
introduced, without actually citing the literature accurately.
  consider

-The same applies to the review of precession in compact binaries,
references to the seminal works by Apostolatos et al. (1994) and
Kidder (1995) are largely ignored.
  consider

-Appendix B is largely a rewrite of Campanelli et al, Schmidt et al and O'Shaughnessy et al. I do not understand the necessity for it.
  consider
  
-Appendix E on the other hand should be promoted to a regular section in the main body of the text as it contains one of the most interestin results.
  consider
  
-Appendix D does not seem very relevant either.
  consider

-Important summary points about how precession is incorporated in current waveform models should be added to the relevant section in the main text and contrasted with the developments of the authors.
  consider

-Generally, I think it would greatly improve the structure of the
manuscript if the methodology section included basic things like the
definition of parameters and precession rather than having it
scattered across several sections.
  consider
  
I strongly encourage the authors to restructure and shorten the
manuscript, and to take care of missing citations and
misrepresentation through lack of citations in several sections.
  covered by the rest?

Concrete comments:

Page 1:

Refs. [1-4] there are several reported detections by LIGO/Virgo
missing, e.g GW170608 and GW170814
 easy
 
LIGO -> Advanced LIGO
 done (only in first status instance)

Virog -> Advanced Virgo
  easy (only in first status instance)

Add reference to Advanced LIGO
  easy

"... at an ever increasning rate." Add reference to rates paper.
  easy

3rd -> third
  done

Add reference to LISA Pathfinder
  easy

"... require accurate models .." -> requires
  done

"... performed for the LIGO detection [3,13]": Bayesian PE was
performed on ALL reported events. The references are incomplete.
Add reference to lalinference paper Veitch et al.
  unsure
  
Acronym IMR is not defined "phenomenlogical templates ...":
  done
  
references are incomplete. Add Ajith et al. PRL (PhenomB), Santamaria et. al PRD (PhenomC)
  easy
  
References to ROMs should include Canizares et al.
  easy
  
Regarding precessing IMR, only [18] and [21] describe such. [26] is
inspiral only, and [27] does not contain a long inspiral.
  consider

Page 2:

"Importantly for this work ...": I don't understand this statement in
the context of the paper, and on its own it is incorrect and
misleading.Only the NR ROMs have been successfully constructed via
sparse representation. No time-domain IMR model (SEOBNRv3) has had a
surrogate built successfully (yet). Further, no such sparse
representation is needed for phenom. models due to their closed-form
and Fourier domain nature.
  consider:
  
"In the presence of misaligned spins": (mis)-alignment has not been
defined.
  easy
  
"the system will endure": endure does not seem an appropriate choice.
Maybe say undergoes/exhibits.
  easy
  
State why the increased dimensionality is a problem.
  consider:
  
The paragraph (and subsequent sections) on modelling precession seem
rather biased. The very first proposal to decompose precessing
waveforms into a carrier phase plus a modulation was put forward by
Apostolatos et al in 1994 (not cited in this context) The first time
that this decomposition was actually demonstrated successfully (the
BCV approch fails) was in Schmidt et al. Phys.Rev. D86 (2012) 104063,
which the authors fail to cite completely.
  consider:
  
".. the resulting waveform ...": rotated -> rotating
  done

"To follow this modelling ..." : this sentence reads very strange to
me. PhenomP is in the Fourier domain and does indeed use a specific
type of transfer function to construct the rotation in the FD. In that
sense, it uses a specific prescription to translate the time-domain
modulations into FD ones. The sentence reads as if the authors are the
first to propose this modelling strategy, which is not true.
  consider:

"For short duration ...": LIGO -> LIGO and Virgo
  done

"To leverage the performance ...": Ref. [40] refers to a time-domain
model. I suggest to cite [17] (PhenomD) and [18] (PhenomP)
  consider:
  
"however, this formalism ...": precessing-frame is not defined. Cite
[26] which shows the limitation to inspiral signals.
   consider:
   
Page 3:
"In the case of precessing waveforms ...": the modulation function ARE
the Wigner D-matrices. The text reads as if this was something that
will be shown by the authors but in fact is the basis for the
state-of-the-art precessing IMR models PhenomP and SEOBNRv3. Add
references to Schmidt et al. 2012, [18], and [21].
  consider:

Page 4:
Subscript slr is not defined
TDI is not defined
"A number of authors ...": Add reference to Schmidt et al 2012. This
was in fact the first time that this approach was demonstrated
successfully, largely due to the correct identification of the carrier
phase which has never been done previously. More comparisons to a
large set up NR waveform were subsequently performed in Pekowsky et
al.
  consider:

Eq. (5): citing Goldberg et al seems rather inappropriate here. While
Goldberg's paper of course contains the general transformation
behaviour (as does Wigner's original book), the general identification
between inertial and precessing waveforms via a a Wigner matrix based
rotation can be found in Arun et al (2009) (not in the context of
using quasi-nonprecessing waveforms though) and Schmidt et al. 2012
(see Eq. 5.3/5.4 therein).
  consider:
  
Page 6:
"In the absence of delays as in the case of precessing binaries ..":
This statement is made multiple times. I find it confusing as such a
statement is only true for precessing binaries seen by Advanced
ground-based detectors. This is NOT true for precessing binaries
observed by LISA as the authors show in Appendix E. The distinction
should be made clear throughout the manuscript.

"As shown in Sec. II C": it would be more useful to cite the
appropriate Eq. rather than the whole section.
  consider:
  
Page 7:
Eq. (20) corresponds to the phase derivative model exploited in the recent
Phenom models. It might be worth mentioning.
  consider:
  
Fig 1: the legend seems to be missing one binary?
  consider:
  
full -> solid
  done
  
The q8 binary seems to be the only one that shows a significant
difference between t_f and the peak frequency. If I understand
correctly, then the alignment is based on the mode amplitude but t_f
uses the phase. Why do you expect agreement in the first place?
  consider:
  
Page 12:
"The delays d are only present ...": as previously noted, this is
another place where it sound like delays are never a problem for
precessing binaries. see also below ("In the context of ...")
  consider: Isn't that explicit?
  
Eqn. (52): the symbol \epsilon is used with different meanings
  consider:
  
Page 13:
SSB is undefined
   yes it is
   
Page 14:
enveloppe -> envelope
"We refer to App. E ...": consider moving this to the main body
    done
    
Page 15:
Fig 4.: labels are too small
  consider:
    
Page 16:
Can Fig 3. be moved to appear close to the text passage describing it?
  consider:
    
Page 18:
Figs. 5. & 6.: Maybe add plot titles "high-mass" and "low-mass"
  consider:

"For SOBH systems, however, \eta will take a continuous set of values
...": Where do the values 10^-4 to 5 come from?
  consider:
      
Page 19/20:
Figs. 7., 8., 10., 12, 13: in BW printout it's difficult to identify
the curves with the legends
  consider:

Page 21:
"As proposed by several authors ...": Add reference to Schmidt+ 2012.
This was not noted at all in Ref. 30. (BCV)
  consider:
  
"In particular, one recovers ..": This was shown in Ref. [22] and
should be cited accordingly.
  consider:
  
Page 22:
"The first two angles ...": cite Refs. 32 and Schmidt et al 2012,
where this is actually demonstrated
  considier:huh?
  
"Quite generically ...": cite 28 and 80 regarding the slow variation
of the precession cone.

"The modes in the inertial frame ...": cite Schmidt et al 2012 here.
Also, this is a repetition of Eq. (5)

P-frame not defined

"An important qualitative ...": the smallness of the opening angle is
generally not applicable to LIGO sources. Quantify the statement.

Eq.(82) is also the basis for the calculation in Ref. [80]. Cite
accordingly.

The observation that Eq. (84) holds approximately for modes in the
co-precessing frame has been made in several papers in the literature.
Cite 32, 33, 34

General comment on Sec. V A: I do not understand the need for this
extensive repetition of existing literature.

Page 24:
"After the merger occurs...": All three prescriptions [32-34] proposed
in the literature are based on the waveform itself

QNM is not defined

"Table 1 shows ...": For which Phenom model are the final spins
computed? PhenomD and PhenomP use different final spin formulae

Footnote 9: Has it been shown that the incorporation of more NR data
really improves the agreement? Overfitting when the wrong NR data are
used may pose a serious issue. Or is this referring to the old final
spin formula used in SEOBNRv3?

Page 25:
Fig 14: Why are the SEOBNR and model \beta-angles so different before
t0?

left panel -> top panel

"In the inspiral phase ...": cite various PN timescale analyses papers
(e.g. Apostolatos+, Kesden+, Gerosa+)

"We will use the following notation": should go much earlier in the
manuscript

Page 26:
Eq. (102): could there be a J missing?

"this is a consequence of our simple precession ..": cite Apostolatos
1994 as well

"..the opening angle ..": this only applies to the early inspiral and
should be pointed out. Ref. [80] would be appropriate.

Page 27:
"we can somewhat complement": the assumptions on the previous page
really only apply to the early inspiral regime. It is not evident to
me how the authors connect their poser-merger model to late inspiral
and merger.

".. the setting of a Fourier-domain precessing-frame waveform combined
with a time-domain precession modulation": This really is the key idea
of the approach and should be highlighted earlier in the manuscript.
In the context of precession, however, this reduces to a transfer
function that corresponds to the convolution of precessing-frame
waveforms with Wigner D-matrices as developed in 32, Schmidt+ 2012,
18, and 21


Page 28:
Fig. 16: full -> solid
as before, in BW graphs are difficult to map to legend

Fig 17: show the full plot range in the lower panel

Page 29:
orignal -> original

"However, this statement ...": Is that because f_0 changes with m? Can
you elaborate?

Page 30:
"To obtain the latter ...": Why isn't the inertial PhenomD h_22 used
directly instead of an expensive iFFT?

Which SEOB is used here?

"..commonly used to quantify disagreements ...": it's not only used
for templates and NR waveforms.

Regarding precessing matches: time, phase and polarisation
optimisation for matches are also performed in Pekowsky,
O'Shaughnessy, Healy and Shoemaker (2013) and Schmidt, Ohme, Hannam
(2015) several years before Blackman et al.

Page 33:
Add reference to the Einstein Telescope

Appendix B:
No references at all. Eqn. B1 are the same as Eq. 5 and Eq. 77.

In Eq. B4, what does ABFO stand for?

"Here we use the dominant eigenvector ...": it would be fair to note
that the method in [33] corresponds one-to-one the method in [32] only
using an algebraic version. Their correspondence was shown in [34]

"note that in the original proposal ...": This comment seems strange.
The formula is generic, only a spin-2 field is required.

Page 38:
"... to a single effective spin." It should be single effective
precession spin to avoid confusion with the aligned-spin \chi_eff
(Racine, Ajith et al) and the corresponding reference is Schmidt,
Ohme, Hannam (2015)

Appendix E:
as mentioned before, this should be elevated to a section in the main
body of the manuscript.
